# GOAL

OONI is a project aimed at mapping network anomalies by performing measurements
from the vantage point of a users.
You may find details on what exactly it is that we measure by reading through
our [test specifications](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni-spec/tree/master/test-specs).
The data we collect is then made available to the public for further analysis.

The goal of this study is to have a better understanding on how the internet
works around the world and what is stopping it from working as it should.

Please take a minute to go through what can be the possible implications for
running ooniprobe and make sure you properly understand them before proceeding.

# LEGALITY

Before running OONI inside of a country with controversial internet access
related laws you should consult a lawyer. You may also reach out to us with
specific inquiries at legal@ooni.nu.

Some network tests that OONI does may be against the terms of service of your
ISP or legally questionable by your country.

OONI's http test will download data from controversial websites,
specifically targeting those which may be censored in your country.
These may include, for example, sites containing pornography or hate
speech. You can find a list of sites checked at
https://github.com/citizenlab/test-lists

Even where these sites are not blocked, it may be illegal to access
them. It may also be illegal to bypass censorship, as OONI attempts by
using Tor.

In the most extreme case, any form of active network measurement could be
illegal or banned, or even considered a form of espionage.

Some useful resources may be:

* [Tor Legal FAQ](https://www.eff.org/torchallenge/faq.html)

* [EFF Know Your Rights](https://www.eff.org/issues/know-your-rights)

# PRIVACY

OONI IS NOT DESIGNED TO PROTECT YOUR PRIVACY. It will reveal information
about your internet connection to the whole world. Particular groups,
such as your ISP and web services used by the ooni tests, will be able
to discover even more detailed information about you.

THE PUBLIC will be able to see the information collected by ooniprobe.
This will definitely include your approximate location, the network
(ASN) you are connecting from, and when you ran ooniprobe. Other
identifying information, such as your IP address, is not deliberately
collected, but may be included in HTTP headers or other metadata. The
full page content downloaded by OONI could potentially include further
information, for example if a website includes tracking codes or custom
content based on your network location.

You can see what information OONI releases to the public at
https://ooni.torproject.org/data/. You should expect this information
to remain online PERMANENTLY.

THE OONI PROJECT when running some tests against our backends will be able to
see your IP address.

ORGANIZATIONS MONITORING YOUR INTERNET CONNECTION will be able to see
all web traffic generated by OONI, including your IP address, and will
likely be able to link it to you personally. These organizations might
include your government, your ISP, and your employer.

ANYBODY WITH ACCESS TO YOUR COMPUTER, now or in the future, may be able
to detect that you have installed or run ooni.

SERVICES CONNECTED TO BY OONI will be able to see your IP address, and
may be able to detect that you are using OONI.
