# Risks: Things you should know before using OONI

OONI's software tests are designed to test networks for symptoms of censorship,
surveillance and traffic manipulation and, in some countries around the world,
this could potentially raise **legal** and/or **extra-legal risks**. We
therefore strongly urge you to consult with lawyers *prior* to downloading,
installing and running OONI, and to carefully read the documentation below.

## Legal and extra-legal risks

The legal risks of downloading, installing and running OONI can vary from
country to country, which is why we advise you to consult with local lawyers. In
extreme cases, any form of active network measurement could be illegal, or even
considered a form of espionage.

Some questions worth asking lawyers relating to the use of OONI can include
the following:

* Does country X have laws in force that restrict or prohibit the use of:

  * **network measurement software**?

  * **censorship detection software**?

  * **censorship circumvention software**?

* Does country X have laws in force that restrict or prohibit certain types
  of **internet access**? (for example, is it illegal to access certain
  websites?)

* Does country X have laws in force or ISP License Agreements that require
  Internet Service Providers (ISPs) to track users' online activities and to
  retain such records?

* Have laws or rules in country X ever been used to criminalize groups or
  individuals based on their internet activity? (this does not necessarily need
  to be specific to network measurements)

While most countries don't have laws which specifically prohibit the use of
network measurement software, it's important to note that the use of OONI can
*still* potentially be criminalized in certain countries under other, broader
laws if, for example, its use is viewed as an illegal or anti-government
activity. OONI users might also face the risk of being criminalized on the
grounds of *national security* if the data obtained and published by running
OONI is viewed as "jeopardizing" the country's external or internal security.

Many countries have a lengthy history of subjecting digital rights activists to
various forms of abuse that could make it dangerous for individuals in these
countries to run OONI. The use of OONI might therefore subject users to severe
civil, criminal, or extra-judicial penalties, and such sanctions can potentially
include:

* Imprisonment

* Physical assaults

* Large fines

* Receiving threats

* Being placed on government watchlists

* Targeted for surveillance

In view of such legal and extra-legal threats, we strongly encourage you to
consult with lawyers and understand legal risks *prior* to using OONI. 

## Risks: Detection of OONI usage

Various legal and extra-legal risks (as explained in the previous section) might
potentially emerge if third parties (such as governments and ISPs) who view the
use of OONI as an illegal or generally "suspicious" activity detect an OONI
user.

The use of OONI can potentially be detected by third parties through the
following:

**Surveillance**

Third parties (such as your government, ISP and/or employer) monitoring your
internet activity will be able to see all web traffic generated by OONI,
including your IP address, and might be able to link it to you personally.

Many countries employ sophisticated surveillance measures that allow governments
to track individuals' online activities – even if they are using a VPN or a
proxy server to protect their privacy. In such countries, governments might be
able to identify you as a OONI user regardless of what measures you take to
protect your online privacy. 

**Tested services**

Services connected to by OONI will be able to see your IP address and might be
able to detect that you are using OONI. You can view which services OONI tests
[here](https://github.com/citizenlab/test-lists/tree/master/lists).

**Physical or remote access to a user's device**

As with any other software, the usage of ooniprobe can leave traces. As such,
anybody with physical or remote access to your computer might be able to see
that you have downloaded, installed or run OONI.

To remove traces of ooniprobe usage, you can re-install your operating system or
wipe your computer and remove everything (operating system, programs and files)
from your hard drive.

**Publication of measurements**

The public (including third parties who view the usage of OONI as illegal or
"suspicious") will be able to see the information collected by OONI once it's
published through:

* [OONI Explorer](https://explorer.ooni.torproject.org/world/)

* [OONI's list of measurements](https://measurements.ooni.torproject.org/)

Unless users **[opt-out](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni-spec/blob/master
/informed-consent/data-policy.md#opt-out)**, all measurements that are generated
through OONI tests are by default sent to OONI's measurement collector and
automatically published through the above resources.

Published data will include your approximate location, the network (ASN) you are
connecting from, and when you ran ooniprobe. Other identifying information, such
as your IP address, is *not* deliberately collected, but might be included in
HTTP headers or other metadata. The full page content downloaded by OONI could
potentially include further information if, for example, a website includes
tracking codes or custom content based on your network location. Such
information could potentially aid third parties in detecting you as an OONI
user.

## Risks: OONI tests

OONI has developed multiple software tests, each one of which is designed to
perform a different function and can therefore potentially entail different
types of legal and/or extra-legal risks.

In summary, OONI tests are designed to:

* Detect whether websites are blocked

* Detect the presence of systems which might be responsible for censorship,
  surveillance and traffic manipulation

* Examine whether censorship circumvention tools, such as [Tor
bridges](https://bridges.torproject.org/), [Psiphon](https://psiphon.ca/),
[Lantern](https://getlantern.org/) and [OpenVPN](https://openvpn.net/), are
blocked

We urge you to review the
**[specifications](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni- spec/tree/master/test-
specs)** for each OONI test carefully, prior to running them.

**Legality of tested websites**

When running either oonideckgen (which includes the web-connectivity test) or
OONI's **[HTTP- request](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni-
spec/blob/master/test- specs/ts-003-http-requests.md)** test, you will connect
to and download data from various websites which are included in the following
two lists:

* **Country-specific test list:** https://github.com/citizenlab/test-
  lists/tree/master/lists (search for your country's test list based on its
  country code)

* **Global test list:** https://github.com/citizenlab/test-
  lists/blob/master/lists/global.csv (including a list of globally accessed
  websites)

Many websites included in the above lists will likely be controversial and can
include pornography or hate speech, which might be illegal to access in your
country. We therefore recommend that you examine carefully whether you are
willing to take the risk of accessing and downloading data from such websites
through OONI tests, especially if this could potentially lead to various forms
of retribution.

If you are uncertain of the potential implications of connecting to and
downloading data from the websites listed in the above lists, you can pass your
*own* test list with the ooniprobe `-f` command line option.

**Legality of OONI software tests**

While network measurements or the use of censorship detection software might not
be illegal per se, some network tests that OONI does might be against the *terms
of service of your Internet Service Provider (ISP)* or legally questionable in
your country. 

OONI's **[HTTP-invalid-request-line](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni-
spec/blob/master/test-specs/ts-007-http-invalid-request-line.md)** test (which
is included in oonideckgen) probably presents the *highest risk* as its use
*might* trigger the suspicion of your ISP (and possibly, of your government) and
lead to prosecution under **computer misuse laws** (or other laws) if detected.

Specifically, OONI's **[HTTP-invalid-request-
line](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni- spec/blob/master/test-specs/ts-007
-http-invalid-request-line.md)** test is designed to send "out-of-spec
messages", which are protocol messages that are *not* valid according to the
relevant protocol speficiation. Such messages are part of an invalid HTTP
request line, containing an invalid HTTP version number, an invalid field count
and a huge request method. This test sends "out-of-spec" messages to an echo
service, which is designed to simply send back to the originating source any
data that it receives. If a network component (which could potentially include
censorship and/or surveillance software) is present in the network between the
user and an echo service, it will intercept the invalid HTTP request line ("out-
of-spec message") and trigger an error, which will be sent back to the user.
Such errors indicate the presence of network components (some of which may or
may not responsible for censorship and traffic manipulation) and, in some cases,
the vendors of such technologies are identified (like in the case of BlueCoat,
for example).

However, it's important to note that running this test can potentially be very
**risky**, as **the operators of network components affected by out-of-spec
messages might view them as attacks**. There have been
[cases](http://www.theregister.co.uk/2005/10/11/tsunami_hacker_followup/)
(though unrelated to OONI) where people were convicted under **computer misuse
laws** for sending out-of-spec messages (or messages that were perceived to be
out-of-spec), even when there is considerable doubt that they intended to
perform an attack. Such risks have been documented in Western democracies, and
are likely to be even worse in countries where the rule of law is less
consistently applied.

By running oonideckgen, you *by default* run OONI's HTTP-invalid-request-line
test (in addition to the web-connectivity and HTTP-header-field-
manipulation tests). You can *opt-out* from running this test by specifying the
test(s) that you want to run and by running it/them manually. You can view how
to run each OONI test through the ooniprobe `-s` command line option.

You can run each test included in oonideckgen separately through the following:

* **Web connectivity test:** `ooniprobe
    blocking/web_connectivity` 

* **HTTP header field manipulation test:** `ooniprobe
    manipulation/http_header_field_manipulation`

* **HTTP invalid request line test:** `ooniprobe
    manipulation/http_invalid_request_line`

**Legality of anonymity software**

The installation of [Tor](https://www.torproject.org/) software, which is
designed for online anonymity, is a *prerequisite* for using OONI due to the
following:

* OONI's [HTTP-request test](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni-
  spec/blob/master/test-specs/ts-003-http-requests.md) is designed to compare
  HTTP requests over the network of the user and over Tor

* Unless users [opt-out](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni-
  spec/blob/master/informed-consent/data-policy.md#opt-out), all measurements
  are by default sent to OONI over Tor

Furthermore, OONI's **[bridge-reachability](https://github.com/TheTorProject
/ooni-spec/blob/master/test- specs/ts-011-bridge-reachability.md)** test is
designed to check whether [Tor bridges](https://bridges.torproject.org/) are
blocked or not. 

Similarly, the following OONI tests require the installation of circumvention
software:

* **[Psiphon](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni-spec/blob/master/test-
specs/ts-015-psiphon.md)**

* **[Lantern](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni-
spec/blob/master/test-specs/ts-013-lantern.md)**

* **[OpenVPN](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni-spec/blob/master/test-
specs/ts-016-openvpn.md)**

We therefore encourage you to consult with a lawyer on the legality of anonymity
software (such as Tor, a VPN or a proxy) *prior* to using OONI.

## Legal advice

In addition to consulting with laywers, you can also reach out to us with
specific inquiries at **legal@openobservatory.org**. Please note though that we
are *not* lawyers, but we might be able to seek legal advice for you or to put
you in touch with lawyers who could address your questions and/or concerns.

Some relevant resources include:

* [Tor Legal FAQ](https://www.eff.org/torchallenge/faq.html)

* [EFF Know Your Rights](https://www.eff.org/issues/know-your-rights) 


**Note:** The use of OONI is at your *own risk* in accordance to OONI's software
[license](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni- probe/blob/master/LICENSE) and
neither the OONI project nor its parent organization, the Tor Project, can be
held liable.