# OONI Consent Form

The [Open Observatory of Network Interference
(OONI)](https://ooni.torproject.org/) is a free software project, under the [Tor
Project](https://www.torproject.org/), which collects and processes network
measurements with the aim of detecting network anomalies, such as censorship and
traffic manipulation. 

Running OONI's software tests can potentially be a *risky* activity, depending on
the laws and jurisdition of the country that you are running them from. This
also largely depends on which tests you run and on which URLs you test. Please
read this document carefully to understand more about the risks related to
the use of ooniprobe.

By running ooniprobe, you are participating as a volunteer in this project. This
form includes information that you should be aware of and consent to *prior* to
running ooniprobe.

## Risks

Many countries have a lengthy history of subjecting digital rights activists to
various forms of abuse that could make it dangerous for individuals in these
countries to run ooniprobe. The use of ooniprobe might therefore subject users
to severe civil, criminal, or extra-judicial penalties, and such sanctions can
potentially include:

* Imprisonment

* Physical assaults

* Large fines

* Receiving threats

* Being placed on government watch lists

* Targeted for surveillance

While most countries don't have laws which specifically prohibit the use of
network measurement software, it's important to note that the use of ooniprobe can
*still* potentially be criminalized in certain countries under other, broader
laws if, for example, its use is viewed as an illegal or anti-government
activity. OONI users might also face the risk of being criminalized on the
grounds of *national security* if the data obtained and published by running
ooniprobe is viewed as "jeopardizing" the country's external or internal security. In
extreme cases, any form of active network measurement could be illegal, or even
considered a form of espionage.

We therefore strongly urge you to consult with lawyers *prior* to running
ooniprobe. You can also reach out to us with specific inquiries at
**contact@openobservatory.org**. Please note though that we are *not* lawyers,
but we might be able to seek legal advice for you or to put you in touch with
lawyers who could address your questions and/or concerns.

Some relevant resources include:

* [Tor Legal FAQ](https://www.eff.org/torchallenge/faq.html)

* [EFF Know Your Rights](https://www.eff.org/issues/know-your-rights)

**Note:** The use of ooniprobe is at your *own risk* in accordance to OONI's software
[license](https://github.com/TheTorProject/ooni-probe/blob/master/LICENSE) and
neither the OONI project nor its parent organization, the Tor Project, can be
held liable.

**Installing ooniprobe**

As with any other software, the usage of ooniprobe can leave traces. As such,
anybody with physical or remote access to your computer might be able to see
that you have downloaded, installed or run OONI.

The installation of [Tor](https://www.torproject.org/) software, which is
designed for online anonymity, is a *prerequisite* for using ooniprobe as
measurements are sent to OONI over Tor. Furthermore, OONI's Web Connectivity
test is designed to compare HTTP requests over the network of the user and over
the Tor network. Similarly, OONI's Psiphon, Lantern and OpenVPN tests require
the installation of other circumvention software.

We therefore encourage you to consult with a lawyer on the legality of anonymity
software (such as Tor, a VPN or a proxy) *prior* to installing ooniprobe.

To remove traces of software usage, you can re-install your operating system or
wipe your computer and remove everything (operating system, programs and files)
from your hard drive.

**Running ooniprobe**

Third parties (such as your government, ISP and/or employer) monitoring your
internet activity will be able to see all web traffic generated by ooniprobe,
including your IP address, and might be able to link it to you personally.

Many countries employ sophisticated surveillance measures that allow governments
to track individuals' online activities – even if they are using a VPN or a
proxy server to protect their privacy. In such countries, governments might be
able to identify you as a OONI user regardless of what measures you take to
protect your online privacy.

OONI's **[HTTP-invalid-request-line](https://ooni.torproject.org/nettest/http-invalid-request-line/)** test probably presents the *highest risk* as its use
*might* trigger the suspicion of your ISP (and possibly, of your government),
the operators of network components affected by out-of-spec messages might view
them as attacks and this could potentially lead to prosecution under computer
misuse laws (or other laws).

**Testing URLs for censorship**

When running OONI's **Web Connectivity** or **HTTP requests** test, you will
connect to and download data from various websites which are included in the
following two lists:

* **Country-specific test list:**
  https://github.com/citizenlab/test-lists/tree/master/lists
  (search for your country's test list based on its country code)

* **Global test list:**
  https://github.com/citizenlab/test-lists/blob/master/lists/global.csv
  (including a list of globally accessed websites)

Many websites included in the above lists will likely be controversial and can
include pornography or hate speech, which might be illegal to access in your
country. We therefore recommend that you examine carefully whether you are
willing to take the risk of accessing and downloading data from such websites
through OONI tests, especially if this could potentially lead to various forms
of retribution.

If you are uncertain of the potential implications of connecting to and
downloading data from the websites listed in the above lists, you can choose
which URLs to test via OONI's Web User Interface (WUI).

**Publication of measurements**

The public (including third parties who view the usage of OONI as illegal or
"suspicious") will be able to see the information collected by OONI once it's
published through:

* [OONI Explorer](https://explorer.ooni.torproject.org/world/)

* [OONI's list of measurements](https://measurements.ooni.torproject.org/)

Unless you **opt-out** through the configuration options of OONI's WUI, all
measurements that are generated through OONI tests are by default sent to OONI's
measurement collector and automatically published through the above resources.

Published data will include your approximate location, the network (ASN) you are
connecting from, and when you ran ooniprobe. Other identifying information, such
as your IP address, is *not* deliberately collected, but might be included in
HTTP headers or other metadata. The full page content downloaded by OONI could
potentially include further information if, for example, a website includes
tracking codes or custom content based on your network location. Such
information could potentially aid third parties in detecting you as an ooniprobe
user.

## Consent

My consent means the following:

I understand the requirements and the risks of running ooniprobe.

I understand that, unless I opt-out (through the configuration options of OONI's
WUI), the results of the tests that I run will by default be sent to the OONI
project and published by it.

[ ] I have reviewed the form and provide my consent.